Add a readme (#7)
docker/labs-tape: README.md

# Tape is for packaging applications

## What is Tape?

Tape is a tool that can package an entire application as a self-contained (taped) OCI image that can be deployed to a
Kubernetes cluster. A taped OCI image contains all application components and Kubernetes resources required to run all
of the components together.

## What problem does it solve?

The process of building and deploying an application to Kubernetes is highly fragmented. There are many choices that

> one has to make in implementing CI/CD. Leaving aside what CI vendor you pick, the starting point is the overall design of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
one has to make in implementing CI/CD. Leaving aside what CI vendor you pick, the starting point is the overall design of
```
```suggestion
one has to make when implementing CI/CD. Leaving aside what CI vendor you pick, the starting point is the overall design of
```

a pipeline, repository structure, Dockerfiles, use of OCI registry, mapping of revisions to image tags, rules of deployment
based on tags, promotion between environments, as well as various kinds of ways to manage Kubernetes configs and how these
configs get deployed to any particular cluster.

Of course, there is some essential complexity, all CI pipelines will be different and everyone cannot use one and the same

> tool for philosophical reasons. However, as most CI systems rest on shell scripts, it's quite challenging to define

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tool for philosophical reasons. However, as most CI systems rely on shell scripts, it's quite challenging to define
```

contracts. What Tape does is all about having a simple artifact, which is a concrete contractual term, and Tape ensures

> it has certain properties, such as it references all formal dependencies by digest, i.e. dependencies that are OCI images

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it has certain properties, for example, it references all formal dependencies by digest, i.e. dependencies that are OCI images
```

referenced from a canonical `image` field in a Kubernetes resource (e.g. `spec.containers[].image`).

> Another issue that arises due to fragmentation is about collaboration between organisations that have made different choices,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another issue that arises due to fragmentation is about collaboration between organizations that have made different choices,
```

> despite all using OCI images and Kubernetes APIs.  To illustrate this, let's ask ourselves - "Why should there be any difference

Reviewer: ```suggestion
despite all using OCI images and Kubernetes APIs.  To illustrate this, let's ask ourselves: "Why should there be any difference
```

in the mechanics of how my application is deployed to a Kubernetes cluster vs. someone else's application being deployed to the
same cluster?". Of course, it all comes down to Kubernetes API resources, but there is often a lot that happens in between.

> Sometimes Helm is used, sometimes it's Kustomize, plain manifests are used with some bespoke automation around configs Git,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes Helm is used, sometimes it's Kustomize, sometimes plain manifests are used with some bespoke automation around configs Git,
```

> there many examples of configs defined scripting languages as well. Of course, it's very often a mix of a few approaches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and there many examples of configs defined in scripting languages as well. Of course, it's very often a mix of a few approaches.
```

Even without anything too complicated, there is no such thing as a typical setup with Helm or Kustomize. The problem is that
the knowledge of what the choices are exactly and how some well-known tools might be used is not trivial or automatically
transferable, and there is little to say about the benefits of having something special.

Tape addresses the complexity by using OCI for the distribution of runnable code as well configuration required to run it
correctly on Kubernetes. Tape introduces a notion of application artifact without introducing any particular model of how
components are composed into an artifact. This model aims to be a layer of interoperability between different tools and
provide a logical supply chain entry point and location for storing metadata.

The best analogy is flatpack furniture. Presently, deployment of an application is as if flatpack hasn't been invented, so
when someone orders a wooden cabinet, all that arrives in a box is just the pieces of wood, they have to shop for nuts,

> bolts, and tools. Of course, that might be desirable for some, as they have a well-stocked workshop with the best tools and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
bolts, and tools. Of course, that might be desirable for some, as they have a well stocked workshop with the best tools and
```

one has to buy?
That model doesn't scale to the consumer market. Of course, some consumers might have a toolbox, but very few will be able
to find the right nuts and bolts or even bother looking for any, they might just send the whole box back instead.
A taped image is like a flatpack package, it has everything needed as well as assembly instructions, without introducing
new complexity elsewhere and allows users to keep using their favourite tools.

To summarise, Tape reduces the complexity of application delivery by packaging the entire application as an OCI image, providing
a transferable artifact that includes config and all of the components, analogous to flatpack furniture. This notion of artifact
is very important because it helps to define a concise contract.
Tape also produces attestations about the provenance of the configuration source as well as any transforms it applies to the
source. The attestations are attached to the resulting OCI image, so it helps with security and observability as well.

## How does Tape work?

> NB: This describes the current implementation that is very minimal and doesn't achieve all of the ambitious goals

> > as described above, namely it works only with plain YAML and JSON manifests and doesn't yet have key integrations,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> as described above. Namely it works only with plain YAML and JSON manifests and doesn't yet have key integrations,
```

> e.g. with Helm or other tools.

Tape can parse a directory with Kubernetes configuration and find all canonical references to application images.
If an image reference contains a digest, Tape will use it, otherwise it resolves it by making a registry API call.
For each of the images, Tape searches of all well-known related tags, such as external signatures, attestations and
SBOMs. Tape will make a copy of every application image and any tags related to it to a registry the user has specified.
Once images are copied, it updates manifests with new references and bundles the result in an OCI artifact pushed to
the same repo in the registry.

Copying of all application images and referencing by digest is performed to ensure the application and its configuration
are tightly coupled together to provide a single link in the supply chain as well as a single point of distribution
and access control for the whole application.

> Tape also checks the VCS provenance of manifests, so if any manifest files are checked in Git, Tape will attest to what

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tape also checks the VCS provenance of manifests, so if any manifest files are checked in to Git, Tape will attest to what
```

Git repository each file came from, all of the revision metadata, and whether it's been modified or not.
Additionally, Tape attests to all key steps that it performs, e.g. original image references it detects and manifest

> checksums. It stores the attestations using in-toto format in an OCI artifact, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
checksums. It stores the attestations using in-toto format in an OCI artifact.
```

It may also support basic runtime overrides with or without templating e.g. for namespaces and labels.
It should also offer flexibility around templating at buildtime, runtime, or done partially buildtime/runtime.

### How does Tape relate to existing tools?

Many existing tools in this space help with some aspects of handling Kubernetes resources. These tools operate on
either loosely coupled collections of resouces (like Kustomize), or opinionated application package formats (most
notably Helm). One of the goals of Tape is to abstract the use of any tools that already exist while paving the way
for innovation. Tape will attempt to integrate with most of the popular tools, and enable anyone to deploy applications
from taped images without having to know if under the hood it will use Kustomize, Helm, just plain manifest, or something
else entirely. The other goal is that users won't need to know about Tape either, perhaps someday `kubectl apply` could
support OCI artifacts and there could be different ways of building the artifacts.

### What kind of applications can Tape package?

> Tape doesn't infer an opinion of how the application is structured, namely what it consists of or doesn't consist of. It doesn't

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tape doesn't infer an opinion of how the application is structured, what it consists of or doesn't consist of. It doesn't
```

      }
    },
    {
      "name": "kustomize/hpa.yaml",
      "digest": {
        "sha256": "d4b2ff6af6077d060652b9849d0cdab1e2818c64e5b501d414d88c24d5abdef8"
      }
    },
    {
      "name": "kustomize/kustomization.yaml",
      "digest": {
        "sha256": "893f8960deed39592fd4f4004b70e0b1b6c691b4e6272da18a41c17360b771f5"
      }
    },
    {
      "name": "kustomize/service.yaml",
      "digest": {
        "sha256": "f187566f212fc14e9be63dab79d9df5cfa71dc284509f227e9a425d152feec85"
      }
    }
  ],
  "predicate": {
    "containedInDirectory": {
      "path": "kustomize",
      "vcsEntries": {
        "providers": [
          "git"
        ],
        "entryGroups": [
          [
            {
              "unmodified": true,
              "path": "kustomize",
              "uri": "https://github.com/stefanprodan/podinfo",
              "isDir": true,
              "git": {
                "objectHash": "e5f73cd48e13a37c7f7c7b116d7da41e9adf7fd6",
                "remotes": {
                  "origin": [
                    "https://github.com/stefanprodan/podinfo"
                  ]
                },
                "reference": {

>                   "name": "refs/heads/master",

Reviewer 2: At the top there is `git switch 6.4.1` but in here in shows `master`. I suggest to redo examples for the Git tag.

Author: `git switch 6.4.1` actually fails, have to use `git switch --detach 6.4.1`... 🙃

Author: Well spotted! I've fixed the output and opened https://github.com/docker/labs-brown-tape/issues/13 to address tags in attestations.

# Tape is for packaging applications

Tape is a tool that allows software authors to package their entire applications as self-contained (taped) OCI images
that can be deployed to a Kubernetes cluster. A taped OCI image contains all application components and configuration
required to run all of the components together.

> 

Reviewer 3: We should add a "What's the problem?" section here

Author: I've rewritten the intro, PTAL :)

parameters can be specified at runtime. It may also support build-time parameters as well as basic runtime overrides,
e.g. for namespaces and labels.

### What kind of applications can Tape package?

Tape doesn't infer an opinion of how the application is structured, namely what it consists of or doesn't consist of. It doesn't
presenet any application definition format, it operates on plain Kubernetes manifests found in a directory.

### Does Tape provide SBOMs?

It doesn't create new SBOMs at the moment, but it may cater for this use case in the future.

## Acknowledgements & Prior Art

What Tape does is very much in the spirit of Docker images, but it extends the idea by shifting the perspective to configuration
as an entry point to a map of dependencies, as opposed to forced separation of app images and configuration.

It's not a novelty to package configuration in OCI, there exist many examples of this practice, but there is no interoperability.
Tape's ambition is to commoditise the model and abstract configuration tooling, so that end-users don't need to think whether a
particular app needs to be deployed with Helm, Kustomize or something else.

> Tape was directly inspired by `flux push artefact`. Incidentally, it also resembles some of the aspects of CNAB, but it is much

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Tape was directly inspired by [flux push artifact](https://fluxcd.io/flux/cheatsheets/oci-artifacts/). Incidentally, it also resembles some of the aspects of CNAB, but it is much
```
